#                  <center>  <span style="color:rgb(255,0,0)"> I’m Born in Exile </span> </center>

### The yearning
I don’t remember when I learned this fact, but the revelation jolted me from within. The fact that we Kashmiri Pandits are not the native people of Jammu, rather we belong to a place called Kashmir. 

The revelation ignited a deep craving to know about the place and understand the puzzle of Kashmir. I started to search for my roots, on the internet, in newspapers, through elders in the family and the biased history books. I tried hard to fathom the complex politics and conflicts of the valley, why we Kashmir Pandits were driven out of our homeland and why *Kashmiriyat* was allowed to die. 

Ironically, in all these endeavors, there was an absence of the essential element- Kashmir, which was a distant dream because of the continued terrorist activities and hesitation of my parents to visit the place after the exile. 

I was born and brought up in Jammu - like thousands of Kashmiri pandits children of my age- and never had visited my homeland nor had my parents after being driven out of the valley in 1990. The dilemma of being a Kashmiri without Kashmir struck me again and again. I was deeply craving to visit the place, which Jahangir had described as a paradise on earth. The place which I had seen only in movies, read about in books and imagined in the wanderings of my mind. Things were not easy; my parents had experienced horrendous events in their past and had lost hope and interest in returning. They had suffered silently and wanted to move on with their life in a peaceful and dignified manner. For me, however, a fire was lit inside; burning me every day and I wanted to be soothed by the calmness of the valley. 

### First Visit to valley
My prayers were finally heard. I visited the valley for the first time in summer of 2006. The excitement of visiting my homeland sent shivers through my body and exalted me to cloud nine. I felt grateful to god for the opportunity. The journey was as beautiful as the destination and after crossing the Jawahar tunnel, the picturesque Valley started showing its beauty much to the excitement of the eyes. For me, it was a discovery of my ancestral place, but to some, it was a reunion with their motherland. I saw my father’s eyes getting wet, a man of rare emotions, he let out the feeling of excitement and nostalgia through his tears. He was visiting the place 16 years after he had to make a turbulent exit in the slumber of the early morning. It was not a dignified exit, but a forceful one, a departure which didn’t have the calming assurance of returning like the normal departures, but only a hope that things will be normal again. The exit was the only way to save themselves from the bloody, ugly massacre. 

### Our Plight
My family ran away like thousands of other Kashmiri Pandits, leaving behind all the mountains, springs and belongings. They took with them only the memories of the place and a hope in their hearts that they will be able to make a respectful entry back into their motherland, that they will be able to sit again in their courtyards drinking kehwa with the exquisite mountains in the background. Those dreams remain unfulfilled despite the waiting, attempting a comeback for two decades. We have now been reduced to mere tourists from being a part of our native place. The exiled Kashmiris have managed to collect all the scattered parts of their lives and start anew in a new territory. During summers visits to Kashmir, the cool and serene winds of the place give us the much-needed respite from the scorching heat of Jammu and a feeling of assurance that this place belongs to us and we are not aliens. The warmth, which Jammu failed to give us, despite providing us with a shelter for more than two decades. Kashmir signifies our language, culture, customs and folktales. It provides the hope in our hearts and gives us the strength to move on with life, reassuring us of the return. 

### Meaning of a Homeland 
The first-time encounter with Kashmir left a deep indelible impact on me, which it has been doing to the millions of people who see it for the first time. I could feel an affinity, an understanding of the pain associated with every part of it, which I never felt in Jammu. I could feel the fact that I belong to this place despite being born and brought up somewhere else. I could feel the pain in my grandfather’s heart when he couldn’t see the end of his life culminating in the place where he was born, brought up, started his family and had to leave abruptly to rescue his life. I could feel the pain of my father when he narrated me the stories from his first job, how he spent those days in the beautiful lap of Gulmarg, which he now visits only in his imagination. He once told me that he never felt the satisfaction of making a new home in Jammu because his heart was somewhere else. I could feel that longing. I realized how much our community has lost in these two decades, but I feel proud that we were resilient enough to stand up again and start anew the whole scheme of life. Despite this comeback, the pain is still there, tearing us, tormenting us, making us remember that what we have lost is much more precious than what we have gained and how much we may try, we can’t detach ourselves from Kashmir. 

I’m still trying to fathom my motherland, but it has been a slow process because of the sporadic visits to the place and because life engages you in the struggles of daily existence. However, I have not let the hope go; I endeavor daily to get a feel of Kashmir outside Kashmir, whether it is by speaking Kashmiri, having the food, discussing the Valley or just reading about it because deep down, there is a ray of hope in me regarding our return to Kashmir. We may have suffered in the past <strike> two </strike> three decades but the future is bright and the valley is waiting for us. 

#### <span style="color:rgb(255,0,0)"> I may have been born in exile but I won’t die in it </span>

Vikesh  
[@vikesh_koul](https://twitter.com/vikesh_koul)

*I had written this years back, today on the 30 year memory of KP exodus, people should know our story. In the cacophony of harsh noises, I don't want the sound of our pain to get lost.*
